---
layout: post
title: Faalis v2
date: 2015-12-21 21:32
categories: Ruby Rails Faalis
tags: Gem Faalis
author: lxsameer
description: Faalis v2
---

It's been about a year since we started working on the second major version of
[Faalis](http://faalis.io) and finally we released v2 yesterday. This release introduce
a complete set of new features something near a rewrite.

## What changed
Let's take a look at changes in compare to previous versions.

### Dashboard Interface & Turbolinks
Maybe the most important change introduced in v2.x in compare to 0.x, and 1.x is the
**new dashboard**. Previous dashboard system was a javascript application based on
AngularJS library. At first when we developed the old dashboard, world still did not
find out about the dark side of AngularJS and every one was so happy with it, but after
a while every one including us begin to realise that AngularJS 1.x has some very serious
issues. For example "angular world" was a huge pain in the ass. Long story short we decided
to not to continue with AngularJS. Our most important reasons were:

* Handling two different application code base takes too much energy.
* Our assets got too big.
* We ended up with a giant JS application which was too slow.
* The damn "Angular World" which caused us lots of work and pain.
* JS application got complex and after a while debugging it was so hard
* And finally [Turbolinks](https://github.com/rails/turbolinks) rocks.

The above reasons were enough to drive me crazy. In that time I suddenly remembered something
important by watching [@dhh](http://david.heinemeierhansson.com/) keynote
[talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJVTM7mE1Cc) on RailsConf 2015. I was totally forgot about
how awesome [Turbolinks](https://github.com/rails/turbolinks) can be. In the past I was ignorant about
**Turbolinks** simply because it was'nt that good at the time being.

After spending a little time to update my knowledge about Turbolinks, I get to work and
created a very basic prototype of **Faalis** dashboard to see how can it be helpful to us.
After a while it was clear to me as the blue sky that **IT'S WHAT WE NEEDED**.

Thanks to Turbolinks we get ride of our huge AngularJS application and replaced it
with very small amount of javascript code. Our Assets size reduced by about 95% specially
in bigger projects. And maaaan it's fast too. But the most awesome experience with turbolinks
in compare to "AngularJS" or any other similar frameworks is that it's **railsy** you just
write ruby and js code in rails fasions nothing special. This feels great.

It **Faalis 2.x**, we re-write dashboard subsystem entirely. Now:

* It's much smaller
* It's much faster
* It's easier to work with dashboard UI API
* Generate code for each resource reduced to minimum.
* Everything is in the same Rails application code base.

New dashboard feels great.

### Dashboard Interface & AdminLTE
Good folks at [almsaeedstudio](http://www.almsaeedstudio.com) create a very nice piece of UI for dashboard
interfaces aka [AdminLTE](https://almsaeedstudio.com/preview) with free software license. It's beautiful and awesome
and uses **bootstrap** which is pretty popular. So we decided to use **AdminLTE** instead of our UI interface.

At first we cloned the **AdminLTE** and made somechanges to use in **Faalis** but after a while we did the right
thing and created a gem called [admin_lte-rails](https://github.com/Yellowen/admin_lte-rails) (Don't ask about the name,
it's awful I know, but it's history :wink:) which uses fantastic [rails-assets.org](http://rails-assets.org) to provide
an automatic build and SCSS version of **AdminLTE** with **RTL** layout support ( which vanilla AdminLTE does not support).
This way we can always be up2date and keep up with **AdminLTE** version.

### Generators
The biggest change in **Faalis 2.x** is to removal of old generators. If you were a **Faalis** user back in the 0.x and 1.x
versions you remember that we used to have a set of very complex code generators. By giving them a `yml` or `json` file,
representing our resource they would generate huge amount of code for that resource to work with both of our Rails and
AngularJS. They were great and handy in their time but we come to realize that the easier way for developers is meta programming
and dynamic codes not some generated static code for each resource. So we removed all the acient history and started fresh.

In **Faalis 2.x** we have only two generator for generating resource code. The main one is `faalis:resource` which takes the
resource name as an argument and generates a dashboard controller alongside with injecting corresponding routes into `routes.rb`.
All the dashboard controllers inherit indirectly from `Faalis::Dashboard::ApplicationController` which provides handful set of
methods and an easy to use DSL for developers to enhance their resource workflow in dashboard. Basically you only have to take
care of translations related to your resource ( don't worry we have a solution for this too :P). Dashboard controllers works
with the related resource model. I mean they do their business by extracting necessary information from models. So no extra
large generated code base for each resource. This way using and modifying dashboard work flows get 'freakin' easy. Also the provided
DSL by `Faalis::Dashboard::ApplicationController` can be a big deal of help to you in order to enhance your work flow.

The second generator `faalis:resources`, is just a shortcut for first one. It gets several resource names and generate them
using `faalis:resource` generator.

Make sure to take a look at **Faalis** [guides](http://guides.faalis.io) to get more info about generators.

### Authorization
**CanCan** is a great gem but was not what we are looking for. So we ditched it in favor of [Pundit](https://github.com/elabs/pundit)
which is fantastic and robust gem designed for flexible authorization. In **Faalis 2.x** in addition to the old
`read` , `create`, `update`, `destroy` and `ownership` permissions for each resource, developers can alter the pundit
authorize class of each resource base on their desire which gives **Faalis** a huge advantage on authorization system.

The most important thing to remember is the this new authorization system is backward compatible you only have to
generate the pundit authorization class for your resource.

### Formtastic
After ditching **AngularJS**, personally I was checking out different options we had to implement our forms. Among
those I reviewed. **Formtastic** stood on top and we used it in new **Faalis**. Formtastic is really awesome and
easy to use and extend which gives us a great opportunity to define our own input classes on demand.


## Conclution
We never released **Faalis 1.x** officially (as gem I mean, you can use it via github). That's because we done several mistakes
which I pointed out some of them in this article. But it gives us a very clear vision about where we want to go in the future. And
**Faalis 2.x** is the result of what we learn alongside the road to **1.x**. Personally I found **Faalis 2.x** fascinating (:)) yeah
because I wrote it). It's really handy and can help any developer save lots of his/her time during web development process.

At last I really love to know your opinions on **Faalis** and its pros/cons. I love to hear about your suggestions or criticisms.
I hope you find it plausible.
